# Preamble

SIP Number: 034

Title: Dimension-Specific Tenure Extend Variants 

Author(s):

- Aaron Blankstein <aaron@stackslabs.com>
- Jude Nelson <jude@stacks.org>

Status: Draft

Consideration: Technical, Governance

Type: Consensus

Layer: Consensus (hard fork)

Created: 2025-10-15

License: CC0-1.0

Discussions-To: 
* SIP pull request: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/236
* SIP reference implementation: https://github.com/stacks-network/stacks-core/pull/6609

# Abstract

This SIP details a rider to SIP-033, including a new variant of the tenure change
control transaction. This variant allows the tenure change to specify a specific 
dimension of the block budget to reset.

# Copyright

This SIP is made available under the terms of the CC0 (Creative Commons Zero)
license, available at https://opensource.org/licenses/CC0-1.0. This SIP’s
copyright is held by the Stacks Open Internet Foundation.

# Introduction

The Stacks network controls total runtime and I/O expenditure during Nakamoto tenures
via a total tenure budget. Costs are tracked using worst-case estimates of the actual
runtime or I/O expended to evaluate a given Clarity operation. In Nakamoto rules,
signers and miners may coordinate to include a `TenureChange` transaction in the miner's
next block which extends the current tenure by resetting the counters for its ongoing
runtime and I/O costs.

This mechanism allows the tenure's overall budget to grow, for example, there has been a long
delay between Bitcoin blocks.  However, if the assessed Clarity costs are much higher
than the actual runtime or I/O characteristics of the executed blocks (i.e., the actual
block runtime is much faster than the worst-case scenario around which costs are modeled),
signers and miners have limited ability to address this. This is because a mismatch in one
dimension (e.g., read-count) should not result in another dimension being reset (e.g., write-count).
Resetting all dimensions of the block budget when only one was misaligned would open the
network up to denial of service (unintentional or otherwise).

To address these concerns, this SIP proposes to add a new variant to `TenureChange` transactions
which allows them to specify **which** cost dimension should be reset (or all of them).

# Specification

## Wire Formats

The serialization of the `TenureChangePayload` will be a backwards-compatible extension of
the existing SIP-021 serialization:

```
tenure consensus hash:	            20 bytes
previous tenure consensus hash:     20 bytes
burn view consensus hash:	        20 bytes
previous tenure end:	            32 bytes
previous tenure blocks:             4 bytes, big-endian
cause:                              1 byte
pubkey hash	20 bytes
```

The `cause` field serializes the new variant in a backwards compatible scheme:

```
0x00 indicates NewBlockFound    whole budget is reset.
0x01 indicates Extend           whole budget is reset.
0x02 indicates Extend           read-count budget is reset.
0x03 indicates Extend           read-length budget is reset.
0x04 indicates Extend           runtime budget is reset.
0x05 indicates Extend           write-count budget is reset.
0x06 indicates Extend           write-length budget is reset.
```

Values `0x00` and `0x01` are used today to indicate whether or not the
`TenureChangePayload` represents a change to a new tenure or the extension
of the ongoing tenure.  No other values are accepted today.
This SIP proposes accepting values `0x02` through `0x06` for `cause`, and taking
the above actions to reset a specific cost dimension's budget.

## Coordination Between Miners and Signers

This SIP only requires Stacks nodes to accept dimension-specific tenure budget
resets via these new `TenureChangePayload` transaction payloads.  It does
not mandate a strategy for coordinating with miners to determine when
dimension-specific resets might be granted.  However, a brief description of how
this might be achieved is provided here, for informational purposes.

In the reference implementation today, signers determine how often a miner can
submit a tenure-extension transaction based on how much "idle time" each signer has
observed in its node.  This is the amount of time the node spends doing work
besides processing block proposals.  Signers individually choose an amount of
idle time that must pass on their node before they will approve a tenure
extension.  By choosing larger idle times, signers ensure that the chain does
not grow so quickly that it prevents miners and signers from catching up to and
staying at the chain tip.  Signers advertize the earliest UNIX epoch time at
which they will accept a tenure extension as part of their block proposal
acknowledgements to the miner.

This behavior is not consensus-critical, and is outside the scope of this SIP,
but is worth mentioning because it informs how future coordination between miners
and signers could work.  Signers may adopt similar notions of idle time for each
budget dimension in order to determine when they will accept a
dimension-specific tenure budget reset.  For example, a signer may measure
the amount of time the node spends _not_ performing read I/O on the chainstate database
("read I/O idle time") to determine when they will issue a read-count reset.

This SIP does not require a coordination strategy to be implemented before its
activation.

# Related Work

The Stacks blockchain measures a transaction's resource expenditures along five
dimensions:  the number or indexed reads ("read count"), the number of bytes
read ("read length"), the number of indexed writes ("write count"), the number
of bytes written ("write length"), and the amount of CPU used ("runtime").  Each
miner is granted a budget of each measured resource to consume over the duration
of their tenure.  Each Clarity operation consumes one or more of these
resources.  A Nakamoto block is only valid if the additional resources its
transactions consume do not exceed the tenure's limits on each of these
resources.

The cost measurements for each Clarity operation were chosen to
ensure that a Stacks node would be able to reprocess the tenure much more
quickly than it is produced.  If this were not the case, then Stacks nodes would
be unable to catch up to the chain tip.  This is particularly dangerous for
Stacks signers, which may go offline for mundane reasons; signers must be able
to quickly catch up to the rest of the signer network.

An alternative approach considered to this SIP was to produce a more accurate
measurement of how much of each resource each Clarity operation consumes.  The
current model is pessimistic, and assumes a worst-case resource consumption.  It
also does not consider the size of the _value_ of the data being processed; it
instead consideres the _worst-case size_ allowed by the data's _type_.
We believe that the approach in this SIP is superior building a more accurate
model (but does not negate a new model's usefulness) because it allows
signers to determine whether or not to allocate more resources to an ongoing
tenure based on their real-world observation of resource consumption when
evaluating block proposals.  As long as the signers observe that resource
consumption in each dimension is below an acceptable threshold, such that a
crashed signer could quickly catch back up, then the signers can safely extend
individual resource budgets regardless of the current model's pessimism
This in turn allows signers to grow the chain's tenure budgets in response
to acquiring better harder, or running upgraded nodes with better
block-processing algorithms.

A future SIP may increase the granularity of tenure extensions.  For example,
the signers may be able to choose the amount of each resource to extend.
This SIP does not call for this in order to speed its implementation.
Furthermore, signers have the option to enforce a more granular resource
consumption rate without a hard fork -- they announce to miners their target
resource consumption rates, and reject miner blocks that consume resources at
higher rate than their target rate.

# Backwards Compatibility

Per the Specification section above, the wire formats for `TenureChange`
transactions are backwards compatible with the existing wire format.  All that
has been added are new values to represent the kind of tenure extension
requested.

# Activation

This is intended as a rider SIP to SIP-033. If SIP-033 is ratified, then this
SIP will also be ratified.
