# Technical CAB Minutes

## Meeting Information

**Location:** Discord (async)

**Recorded:** No

**Date:**

- April 26, 2023

**Time:** 15:00 - 16:00 GMT-4

**Attendees:**

- Brice Dobry
- Dan Trevino
- Daniel Fritsche
- Jamil Dhanani
- Jesse Wiley
- Mike Cohen
- Terje Norderhaug
- Thomas Osmonson

**Topic(s):**

- [SIP-022: Emergency Fix to PoX Stacking Increase](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/127)

**Materials**:

- [SIP-022](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/dd9f12141ca41be673a6fcb4ddf0a9c5a2e4e221/sips/sip-022/sip-022-emergency-pox-fix.md)

## 2023-04-21 Meeting Notes

The technical CAB discussed SIP-022 asynchronously in a Discord group chat, then
set a time, 15:00 GMT-4, for a vote on the proposed SIP. In the several days
prior to this, the CAB members were encouraged to read through the document and
add comments to the PR as needed.

A concern was brought up about what exactly the CAB's approval of the SIP
indicates. Terje wrote:

> We had one job for the SIP-15 CAB review: To green-light that the implemented
> improvements were ready to be safely deployed. The community trusted our
> expertise and that the CABs had done their job when they voted in favor. The
> purpose of the CAB process and community vote was to act as a safeguard.
> Rubber-stamp theater is counter to this purpose. What is our job this time
> around? What exactly does a vote in favor imply?
>
> a) That we approve of the approach suggested in SIP-22
>
> b) That we're confident in the changes in the emergency PR and greenlight the
> first emergeny fork
>
> c) That we're confident in the new PoX3 contract and greenlight deploying the
> second emergency fork

Brice responded:

> This CAB is not responsible for green lighting the implementation, just the
> contents of the SIP. We are voting for (a) only I believe, but we can check
> that with the steering committee and/or the governance CAB

The
[question was posed](https://discord.com/channels/621759717756370964/675389252816732166/1100842976172851312)
to Steering Committee and Governance CAB members in the governance channel, and
Brice's explanation was confirmed:

> Brice — @Gina Ӿ Can you confirm for the Technical CAB that our voting on SIPs
> is on the contents of the SIP and not on the implementation? Also
> @whoabuddy.btc 👆 if the governance CAB has any clarification on that. My
> belief is that the CABs are only responsible for reviewing the content of the
> SIP, not its implementation, but other CAB members would like confirmation of
> that.
> 
> Hero Gamer ⚡ - cc: @jrmith @Marvin
>
> Gina Ӿ — Your belief is correct. The CAB reviews the content of the SIP.

Aside from that, no other concerns were brought up. Jesse mentioned that there
were still some minor edits being made, mostly grammar changes. Dan T. mentioned
that, "the process and reasoning is sound."

Six votes were made for the proposal:

| Name            | Vote |
| --------------- | ---- |
| Jamil Dhanani   | 👍   |
| Dan Trevino     | 👍   |
| Jesse Wiley     | 👍   |
| Thomas Osmonson | 👍   |
| Mike Cohen      | 👍   |
| Brice Dobry     | 👍   |

The Technical CAB approves SIP-022 with 6 yes votes.
