# Technical CAB Minutes

## Meeting Information

**Location:** Zoom

**Recorded:** No

**Date:**

- January 24, 2024

**Time:** 8:00pm - 9:00pm UTC

**Attendees:**

- Brice Dobry (chairperson)
- Aaron Blankstein
- Dan Trevino
- Jesse Wiley
- Jesus Najera
- Mike Cohen
- 0xdima

**Topic(s):**

- Discuss the Nakamoto SIP, in preparation for a vote on Friday (2024-01-26)

**Materials**:

- [PR #155: Nakamoto v1](https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/155)

## 2024-01-24 Meeting Notes

- Discuss [problem brought up by Economics CAB](https://discord.com/channels/@me/1015360202419220530/1199366545068003369)
  - Explain the issue
  - What is the scope of the problem?
    - 1 block reorgs on Bitcoin happen ~daily, 2 block reorgs happen ~every 2 weeks
    - 1 block reorg wouldn't impact the Stacks network because these are blocks that were broadcast simultaneously, and the stackers would already be picking a winner amongst themselves, so these would look as if no bitcoin block is getting processed, causing an extension of the previous miner's tenure
    - The 2 block reorg would look like some amount of time where there were no Stacks blocks
  - What would be a reasonable number of blocks to wait for confirmations after Nakamoto?
    - On day 1, the ordering enforcement would not be in place; would still recommend waiting the same number of bitcoin blocks
    - What is the max depth of bitcoin reorgs in last 10 years? 6 blocks?
  - Is this improved since Stacks blocks don't fork independently in Nakamoto?
    - Yes, this is a strict improvement
  - Will we see situations where we have a large number of tx in the mempool after Nakamoto?
    - There is how fast txs can be processed and there is demand for txs
    - Life with a full mempool is likely no matter what (this is a measure of success)
  - Clarify that the goal of the SIP is not to guarantee better than Bitcoin security, just matching it, and this is definitively an improvement over current Stacks
  - The throughput should be more manageable with these Nakamoto improvements
  - Is there any analysis of follower nodes and how this will affect time to reach tip?
    - Better in some ways, worse in others
      - Improved - networking stack improvements, way that blocks are announced on the network is changed, should be much improved
      - Worse - throughput is going up, so there is more to validate (more CPU and more I/O); currently, at most half is actually validating blocks and the other half is dealing with networking
  - Would subnets be compatible?
    - In theory, there is no reason that they shouldn't be compatible
    - In practice, they may need updates in the wire formats to match Nakamoto changes
  - Will there ever be a situation where you could not have enough I/O to catch up?
    - The network has low requirements, but, even today, a slow enough machine could have an issue
    - Recent blocks have been quite large and there have been quite heavy transactions, these all put a strain on nodes
- Where does the 5s number come from?
  - It's a number that has been mentioned several places, we need some clarity on this
  - Common misconception that this means blocks as full as the current blocks in 5s
  - The throughput should not be expected to be 120x
- Any mention of recovery?
  - The current implicit recovery mechanism is a future emergency SIP
  - If a recovery needs to occur because the signer set collapsed or something, the only recovery currently is an emergency hard fork
- What does the process look like for a node operator?
  - There shouldn't be any real changes, aside from some updates to the guidance on system resources
  - May need to sync from genesis (or use a snapshot)
- Looking at Dan's comments about clarifying the signature validation methods
- Under "Stacker Signing", there is an "X%" that needs to be filled in with a real number
  - Aaron says that this paragraph should be reworded - it is not accurate
  - Empty reward slots should not effect the percentage
  - Aaron will comment on this
- Activation criteria
  - Ensure that the wording is updated to allow voting from non-stackers
